---
layout: post
title: 0.15 — GATs, CapabilityServerSet, and async packing
author: dwrensha
---

Today I am releasing version 0.15.0 of the capnproto-rust crates:
[`capnp`](https://crates.io/crates/capnp),
[`capnpc`](https://crates.io/crates/capnpc),
[`capnp-futures`](https://crates.io/crates/capnp-futures),
and [`capnp-rpc`](https://crates.io/crates/capnp-rpc).
It's been a while -- almost two years since the
[0.14.0 release]({{site.baseurl}}/2020/12/19/atomic-read-limiting.html)!
So what's new?


## Generic Associated Types


Say we have a Cap'n Proto [schema](https://capnproto.org/language.html)
that defines a struct type `Foo`:

```
struct Foo {
  id @0 :UInt64;
  payload @1 :Data;
}
```

When we pass this to the `capnpc-rust` code generator, it
gives us declarations for `foo::Reader<'a>` and `foo::Builder<'b>` types.
These types act as
"[synthetic references]({{site.baseurl}}/2014/12/27/custom-mutable-references.html)",
allowing us to
read a capnp-encoded `Foo` value directly from a byte buffer without
copying it into an intermediate structure.
The `foo::Reader<'a>` type acts like an immutable (shared) reference `&'a Foo`,
and the `foo::Builder<'a>` type acts like a mutable reference `&'a mut Foo`.

Very well, but what if we now want to define
a generic container type for a Cap'n Proto message,
whose contents can be borrowed either immutably or mutably?
Something like:

```rust
struct MessageContainer<T> where T: ??? {
    message: capnp::message::Builder<capnp::message::HeapAllocator>,
    marker:  core::marker::PhantomData<T>,
}

impl <T> MessageContainer<T> where T: ??? {
    fn get(&self) -> ??? { ... }
    fn get_mut(&mut self) -> ??? { ... }
}
```

We want to be able to plug `Foo` (or any other Cap'n Proto struct type)
in for `T` here. How do we fill in the `???` to make this work?

The key is that, in addition to `foo::Reader` and `foo::Builder`,
the `capnpc-rust` code generator also generates
a `foo::Owned` type, meant as a stand in for `Foo` itself
(which cannot be directly represented in Rust).
The type `foo::Owned` has the following impl:
```rust
impl capnp::traits::Owned for foo::Owned {
    type Reader<'a>: foo::Reader<'a>;
    type Builder<'a>: foo::Builder<'a>;
}
```
where `capnp::traits::Owned` is defined as

```rust
pub trait Owned {
    type Reader<'a>: FromPointerReader<'a> + SetPointerBuilder;
    type Builder<'a>: FromPointerBuilder<'a>;
}
```

Then we can fill in `MessageContainer` as follows:

```rust
struct MessageContainer<T> where T: capnp::traits::Owned {
    message: capnp::message::Builder<capnp::message::HeapAllocator>,
    marker:  core::marker::PhantomData<T>,
}

impl <T> MessageContainer<T> where T: capnp::traits::Owned {
    fn get(&self) -> T::Reader<'_> { ... }
    fn get_mut(&mut self) -> T::Builder<'_> { ... }
}

```

Notice that the lifetime parameters on `Owned::Reader`
and `Owned::Builder` make them
[generic associated types](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2022/10/28/gats-stabilization.html),
a newly stablized feature of Rust.

### How it worked before GAT

In previous versions of capnproto-rust,
we needed to hoist the lifetime parameter `<'a>` to the top
of the declaration of `capnp::traits::Owned`, like this:

```rust
pub trait Owned<'a> {
    type Reader: FromPointerReader<'a> + SetPointerBuilder;
    type Builder: FromPointerBuilder<'a>;
}
```

Then, usages of the trait often needed higher rank trait bounds (i.e. `for<'a>...`),
like this:


```rust
struct MessageContainer<T> where T: for<'a> capnp::traits::Owned<'a> {
    message: capnp::message::Builder<capnp::message::HeapAllocator>,
    marker:  core::marker::PhantomData<T>,
}
```

The `for<'a>` syntax makes this trait look more complicated than it actually is,
so it's good that we are finally able to remove it!


## CapabilityServerSet

Consider the following (over)simplified version of
Sandstorm's [web publishing interface](https://github.com/sandstorm-io/sandstorm/blob/d8be67ad5f703bb73f5da4e607cce07106c2a0f1/src/sandstorm/web-publishing.capnp#L24-L98):

```
interface BlobHandle {}

interface BlobWriter {
  write @0 (chunk: Data);
  done @1 () -> (handle :BlobHandle);
}

interface WebSitePublisher {
  createBlob @0 () -> (writer :BlobWriter);
  set @1 (path :Text, blob :BlobHandle);
}
```

To add some piece of content to a web site, an consumer of this API would do the following:

1. Call `createBlob()`.
2. Write to the blob using `BlobWriter.write()`.
3. Call `BlobWriter.done()` to get a `BlobHandle`.
4. Pass the `BlobHandle` to `WebSitePublisher.set()` for each path that should serve the content.

This flow allows uploads to be streamed (step 2),
and it allows a single piece of content to be pushed to multiple paths
(step 4) without duplicated work.

But how is the server supposed to implement `WebSitePublisher.set()`?
The `BlobHandle` that it receives does not have any methods,
so how can anything meaningful be done with it?

Let's first translate the question into Rust code.
The `capnpc-rust`-generated code for the above schema will contain
`Client` structs `blob_handle::Client`, `blob_writer::Client`,
`web_site_publisher::Client`, and `Server` traits
`blob_handle::Server`, `blob_writer::Server`, `web_site_publisher::Server`.
The idea is that the server will implement the `Server` traits,
with structs named perhaps `BlobHandleImpl`, `BlobWriterImpl`,
and `WebSitePublisherImpl`, and then will pass these
structs to RPC system via the `capnp_rpc::new_client()` function.
For example, to create a `BlobHandle`, the implementation
of `blob_writer::Server::done()` might do:

```rust
let blob_handle = BlobHandleImpl::new(blob_bytes);
let client: blob_handle::Client = capnp_rpc::new_client(blob_handle);
```

The issue is that once we call `capnp_rpc::new_client()` we no longer have
access to the underlying `BlobHandleImpl` object,
so by the time we are in `web_site_publisher::Server::set()`, we cannot
get to the blob's bytes.

The solution is to use `CapabilityServerSet`,
a feature that has existed in capnproto-c++
for a long time, and as of today has been added to capnproto-rust.
If a `blob_handle::Client` is created via `CapabilityServerSet::new_client()`,
instead of `capnp_rpc::new_client()`,
then its underlying `BlobHandleImpl` can later be retrieved
via `CapabilityServerSet::get_local_server()`.


```rust
let mut set: CapabilityServerSet<BlobHandleImpl,blob_handle::Client> =
    CapabilityServerSet::new();
...
let blob_handle = BlobHandleImpl::new(blob_bytes);
let client: blob_handle::Client = set.new_client(blob_handle);
```

Then the implementation of `web_site_publisher::Server` could do:

```rust
if let Some(s) = set.get_local_client(&client).await {
    // s has type `&Rc<RefCell<BlobHandleImpl>>`
    ...
}
```


## Async Packing

Cap'n Proto's
[packed codec](https://capnproto.org/encoding.html#packing)
is a way to reduce message size in exchange for
a minimal encoding/decoding cost.

Until recently, capnproto-rust only support the packed codec
via the synchronous `capnp::serialize_packed` API; if you
wanted to pack your data over async I/O, you were out of luck.
In particular, there was no way to use the RPC system with the packed codec.

That has changed now, with
[the addition](https://github.com/capnproto/capnproto-rust/pull/296)
of the `capnp_futures::serialize_packed` module.
It includes standalone functions
`serialize_packed::try_read_message()` and
`serialize_packed::write_message()`, as well
as wrappers

```rust
struct PackedRead<R> where R: AsyncRead { ... }
```
and

```rust
struct PackedWrite<W> where W: AsyncWrite { ... }
```
which can be plugged into `capnp_rpc::twoparty::VatNetwork::new()`
to enable packed RPC.




