---
layout: post
title: 0.18 — lazy UTF-8 and no-alloc
author: dwrensha
---

New release alert!
Version 0.18 of [capnproto-rust](https://github.com/capnproto/capnproto-rust)
is now [available on crates.io](https://crates.io/crates/capnp).

If you use capnproto-rust on data with
the [`Text` built-in type](https://capnproto.org/language.html#built-in-types),
then it's likely that this release will require some
updates to your code.
But don't worry — the changes are straightforward and they bring some
important benefits.

## lazy UTF-8 validation

Suppose we have the following struct defined in a Cap'n Proto schema:

```
struct Foo {
  oneText @0 :Text;
  anotherText @1 :Text;
}
```

Then, in Rust, these `Text` fields can be accessed through the `text::Reader` type:

```rust
let my_foo: foo::Reader = ...;
let one_text: capnp::text::Reader<'_> = my_foo.get_one_text()?;
let another_text: capnp::text::Reader<'_> = my_foo.get_another_text()?;
```

But what exactly is a `text::Reader`?


### the old definition

In previous versions of capnproto-rust, the `text::Reader` type
was an alias to Rust's `&str` type:


```rust
pub mod text {
  type Reader<'a> = &'a str;
}
```

At first glance, this seems like a perfect fit.
A Cap'n Proto `Text` value is required to
contain valid UTF-8 data, just like a Rust `&str`,
and a `text::Reader` is meant to represent
a reference to that data.

However, in practice, there are some ways in which this representation
falls short.

* **performance**: Validating UTF-8 data has a cost,
  and ideally we would like to avoid paying it multiple
  times on the same data. If `text::Reader` is just
  `&str`, then we need to validate every time that we:
  - copy a text field from one message to another,
  - write a text field to a file,
  - write a file to a text field, or
  - access some sub-range of a text field.

  This goes against the general Cap'n Proto philosophy
  of doing validation as lazily as possible.

* **robustness** -- If a text field holds corrupted data, then
  you still might want to be able to access that data, even
  if it is not valid UTF-8. For example, imagine that a text
  field holds log messages from a web server. We should
  still be able to read the messages, even if they are garbled.
  Indeed, garbled messages are probably the most interesting ones,
  as they indicate unexpected behavior.
  See [this issue](https://github.com/capnproto/capnproto-rust/issues/314)
  for more discussion.


### the new definition

To address the above-noted shortcomings,
version 0.18 of capnproto-rust defines `text::Reader`
like this:

```rust
pub mod text {
  /// Wrapper around utf-8 encoded text.
  /// This is defined as a tuple struct to allow pattern matching
  /// on it via byte literals (for example `text::Reader(b"hello")`).
  #[derive(Copy, Clone, PartialEq)]
  pub struct Reader<'a>(pub &'a [u8]);

  impl<'a> Reader<'a> {
    pub fn as_bytes(self) -> &'a [u8] { ... }
    pub fn to_str(self) -> Result<&'a str, Utf8Error> { ... }
    pub fn to_string(self) -> Result<String, Utf8Error> { ... }
  }

  impl<'a> From<&'a str> for Reader<'a> { ... }
  impl<'a> From<&'a [u8]> for Reader<'a> { ... }}
}
```
Now consumers can easily access the underlying data, via `as_bytes()`,
and getting it as a `&str` or `String` just requires an extra `to_str()`
or `to_string()` call.

When setting text fields in a message, you will now need to
insert some `.into()` calls to convert from a `str` or `String`
into a `text::Reader`, like this:

```rust
let name: &str = "alice";
let mut my_foo: foo::Builder = ...;
my_foo.set_one_text("hello world".into())?;
my_foo.set_another_text(format!("hello {name}")[..].into())?;
```

All this is admittedly more verbose than it was before,
but it's in keeping with the general spirit of capnproto-rust:
we are willing to introduce some verbosity
if that's what it takes to model Cap'n Proto data
in a satisfactory way.


## no-alloc mode

Another new feature is no-alloc mode.

In version 0.13, capnproto-rust
[gained support for no_std environments]({{site.baseurl}}/2020/06/06/no-std-support.html).
However, it still depended on the [`alloc`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/alloc/) crate,
which can sometimes be a problem for microcontroller targets and kernel programming.
(See [this issue](https://github.com/capnproto/capnproto-rust/issues/221)
for some discussion.)

Starting with version 0.18, the `capnp` crate now has an
[`alloc` Cargo feature](https://github.com/capnproto/capnproto-rust/blob/82aa8a2163b5eadaa83aa2716ce781fc78107c2c/capnp/Cargo.toml#L26),
which can be disabled to remove the `alloc` dependency.

A side benefit of this change is that now error handling in capnproto-rust
is much less dependent on heap allocation, and so should have better
performance and be more reliable.

